I recently watched a performance.
An artist came on stage and started juggling
plates.
One.
Two.
Three.
Four.
Five plates at a time.
And then, he stood on one foot.
Blindfolded himself.
Continued juggling.
In fact, towards the end, he even managed
to offer his autograph to a member of the
audience, all this while still juggling!
A thundering applause followed.
Exceptionally good, I thought.
But, only later, much later, when I got the
opportunity to come backstage, I noticed something.
There is much more than meets the eye..
Because, behind the actor, there were shattered
plates.
Hundreds of them.
When we compare ourselves with somebody else,
… we compare their successes with our successes
AND failures.
That is the problem!
Namaste!
Apples…
Oranges…
Is it right to compare the two?!
Comparison is wrong.
Roosevelt himself has said that.
American president — it is the thief of
joy, he claimed.
When you are joyful, if the devil of comparison
shows its ugly head, you are done for.
Because, you will no longer be joyful.
You are unique!
Everybody has declared that and motivated
you with those words.
You are SO special.
You be you.
You do you!
All the others are taken!
You are..
You are the only special person!
Where does that come from?
It comes from the genetic makeup.
The society, the environment, you grow in.
If you look at it mathematically, if you try
and calculate how many different YOUs there
can be.., you arrive at 1 in 400 trillion
as the answer!
In such a large number, when you the single
one, when you start comparing with others,..
we have seen these two symbols in mathematics.
Either they will all be better than you..
whoever you look at, “They are better than
me in cricket!
They are better than me in singing!
They have more followers than me in TikTok!”
And, when you realise that they are all better,
you get depressed.
You lose joy.
You no longer have that motivation to do good.
On the other hand, all the other people you
compare with, they will be poorer than you,
not as good as you, not perhaps having as
many followers, not perhaps singing as well
as you can, not playing basketball as well
as you do, .. what happens?
Complacency sets in!
You start thinking yourself as the King!
You start resting on your laurels.
Like the proverbial hare and tortoise story.
And, again, pathway to disaster.
One in four hundred trillion…
Except for one person, any other person you
compare with, you are going to be better which
leads to complacency, or you are going to
be worse which leads to depression.
So… why BOTHER?!
This lady, Laura Miles — has given a beautiful
TED talk.
She uses props.
See there?
An orange.
A banana.
And, she says, “My teacher called me and
told me that I hadn’t done well in the test.
She told me that I was bad..
I went to my Mom, told her what happened.
And, Mom said, “You are bad..!
Improve!”
“Mom,” I said, “The teacher didn’t
say I was bad.
The teacher said I was a bad orange..
I was thinking I was a good banana.
She said, I wasn’t shaped like an orange.
I wasn’t juicy like oranges should be.
My skin wasn’t thick enough.
I was a banana.
Mein banana banaana chahthi hoon.
Orange naheen banaana hai mujhe.”
When that is the situation, if you are going
to be evaluated on a completely different
benchmark, you are going to be labeled..
no point, is there?
You want to be somebody, you set your own
benchmarks, and be the best that you can be.
This book, we have seen earlier too, by Peter
Thiel.
Titled Zero to One.
He gives advice to startups.
One of the most beautiful pieces of advice
he gives… slightly controversial too, perhaps.
He says, “Monopolies are better”.
He warns us, “Hey idiots, don’t head in
the direction where all the competition lies,
and strive to do better than everybody else,
instead, focus on identifying a narrow enough
market, where you can be the monopoly.”
He gives reasons for that too.
He says, in a monopoly, profits are assured.
Apple, for example, is the only company that
probably does hardware as well as its own
software, brings them together so beautifully,
and sells them at a premium.
He can demand any price he wants!
Nobody else around in that market!
Also, when you are a good company, you start
considering the welfare of the employees.
For, only when they are happy and doing well,
the company can innovate continuously and
hope to maintain the monopoly.
And, you start also looking at what you can
do for the society.
You can’t do all this if you are in a competitive
world.
Also, anyway, these monopolies are temporary.
Google, for example, was thinking it was the
monopoly on Search Engines.
But, what is yesterday’s hot news?
It is Red Alert in Google.
Code Red.
Why?
Some new beast called ChatGPT..!
Everybody is using that to find out everything
that they want to know, they are not using
Google any more, what happens to our Ads business..
If you are in a monopoly and you think it
is permanent, you are in trouble..!
Why does Peter Thiel say that this monopoly
is important?
The opposite of it is .. in Economics they
call it..
Perfect Competition.
In the world of perfect competition, .. it
is like salt..
The marketers try many things.
Iodised salt, pink salt, etc.
But, salt is salt.
Sodium Chloride.
Its price won’t climb.
It is commoditised.
Everybody knows the effort required to manufacture
salt.
And to ship it to your door.
And, a little costlier and a little cheaper.
That’s all it is going to be.
If that is the kind of world you are going
to be in, you will always be looking over
your shoulders..
Who is coming?
To meddle with my business?
To undercut me and grab my business?
It is an average world.
Do you want to continue selling average things
to average people in an average manner?
Or, do you want to stand out?
While on the subject of “Standing Out”,
he talks about two kinds of companies.
There are Successful companies — they are
Happy companies.
All Happy companies are different.
Because, each of them have found that niche.
A special identification exclusively for themselves.
They monopolise that special problem and try
to solve it.
But, Unhappy companies?
Why are they Unhappy?
They are Unhappy because they have Failed.
And, they have Failed because they couldn’t
escape competition.
So, we were talking about companies all this
while.
Imagine, for a moment, the same lesson for
the Individual.
Do you want to be a monopoly, or do you want
to compete?
Do you want to be the fastest, the strongest,
the greatest, the tallest… among the people
in your army?
(Goliath) OR, do you want to be the only!
Goliath? he is BEST among the practitioners
of every warrior art form.
David?
He is the only one who knows how to use that
slingshot!
And, who won?!
So, do you want to be the Competitor or do
you want to be the Monopolist?
Seth Godin, when talking about the same concept,
gives us the example of the Shoeshine.
Little kids self-employed, sitting at the
entrance to railway stations, shining the
shoes of ‘dignitaries’ who grace their
shop.
You wipe the dust, shampoo the shoe, polish
it like a mirror, all the while the customer
sits in a grand seat above you.
There are two ways to approach this job.
You can identify the best spot.
You can try to ensure there is no competition.
And you can work harder.
And, that is the Competitive Mindset.
What is the other mindset?
The other mindset is “Why is this customer
here?
Assume I get no other customer,.. that’s
okay.
But, can I get this customer to come to me
again?
Is he here to get his shoes polished?
Or, is he here to take in the chill breeze
for about ten minutes?
Or, is he here just for the kingly treatment
he gets?
The feeling of royalty, albeit for just five
minutes..?
A servant at my feet!
Doing my bidding!”
When you start trying to understand the story
that the customer is telling themselves, and
relate to it, and provide your story overlapping
to it, there lies the Monopolist Mindset.
No matter, if another kid down the road sets
up shop!
Because, he knows that he can get the ‘special
treatment’ only in your shop!
Again, from the world of business, to the
world of individuals!
Can you draw a line?
Can you understand what is the right way to
compare?
There is a book by this name.
Mark Manson’s The Subtle Art of Not Giving
a F*ck.
There is a beautiful example featured in this
book.
This is Dave Mustaine.
Gives amazing performances.
Get a great name.
A band forms around him.
The band is about to release its first album,
and at that time, the manager calls this guy
and gives him the boot!
“Sorry, you are out!”
He is very upset.
He is very angry.
He decides to himself — I need to prove
a point.
I have to do well.
He goes to Los Angeles.
Creates another band.
And, it becomes a successful band.
Sells 25 million albums.
Megadeth it is!
But, is Dave Mustaine happy?
It has sold 25 million albums!
Why wouldn’t you be happy?!
But, he says, in an interview…
The band I was kicked out of is Metallica!
They have sold 180 million albums!
In their view, I am still a failure.
But wait..
Take a look at a very similar comparison.
I know a guy.
Who got kicked out of a prestigious engineering
college.
IIT Madras!
Kicked out!
He indulged in mischief.
He got kicked out.
But, you meet him today and ask him…
He is going to say, “I don’t regret being
kicked out.
Everything happened for good.
Because, .. if I hadn’t been kicked out,
I wouldn’t have met my wife!
My future wife!”
Mindset.
Perspective.
Are you going to compare yourself with all
the other IIT graduates who went abroad, became
CEOs, and achieved amazing things, .. or,
are you going to compare with what other things
could have happened if you hadn’t met your
wife?
And, all the goodness that came your way,
simply because you were kicked out?!
Many people call social media bad.
I have been thinking, Social Media may actually
be good!
Because, it is starting to show us the absolute
best..
Once upon a time, if there was a village,
you could be the best singer in the village..
And a far better singer could be in the adjoining
village and you wouldn’t know about it all
your life…
On the other hand, today, on YouTube, on SoundCloud,
on Tiktok, .. you get to know something that
somebody somewhere far away did, in Korea
and China.
And so the absolute world standard, is out
there.
So, you no longer compare with your colleague,
with your friend, with your next door neighbour.
Because, you may be better than them, they
may be better than you, but both of you suck
with the gold standard.
And today, you have access to the gold standard.
The same thing I think about Open AI too.
Its drawing capability..
MidJourney.
Dall-E. Or, its intelligent chat capability..
If you look at these, on the one hand, you
get a shiver down your spine.
On the other hand, you get a feeling, “Thank
God!
This is is a boon!
Anybody can write a letter?
Good.
No longer do we need to obsess about these
little, cheap things like can you spell a
word well, can you write a grammatically error-free
sentence..
No longer do we need to obsess about those
low-level things.
Let us talk at a higher level!”
I am happy, hence, that these things are happening.
We have talked “comparisons” for quite
a while now.
I am sure you have listened to this yarn too..
“Oh..
Don’t compare yourself with others.
There is only one thing you need to compare
with.
And that..?
Is who you were yesterday..
Have you become better today..
Use that as your benchmark.”
And, my message for such people?
Is this.
Today’s Michael Jordan..
can he compare himself with the Michael Jordan
of twenty years ago?
He is getting older!
He is getting slower!
— Look at him, almost daring his older counterpart
for a quick pickup game!
So.. what’s the solution then?
How can you compare yourself with others?
You can’t.
With your own past..
You may not be able to..
For, you may be over the top.
Over the top of the hill.
Going downhill.
So, what are you going to do..?
I searched far and wide.
And, I have just one answer for you.
And that comes from this book called One.
By Richard Bach.
He is a fighter-jet pilot turned author.
We have encountered him earlier too.
In Jonathan Livingston Seagull.
He says, “I gave my life to become the person
I am right now.
Was it worth it?”
Ask this question.
You may have gained some skills.
You may have lost some touch.
You may have earned some experiences.
You may have suffered some scars.
But, the sum total of that…
All that together.. is the person standing
in that square foot of ground beneath you.
Ask this question every day.
Was it worth it?
That suffering, that pain, that challenge,
that victory, that joy, that sorrow, was it
worth it?
For who you are today!
That should surely be possible.
Even for Michael Jordan.
Always upswinging curve.
As a closing thought, I want to tell you this
story.
There was this king..
He had arthritic pain..
Unbearable.
They call the King’s doctor.
And he advises that if you wrap it tightly
with “Poduthalai”, you will lose the pain.
They refer the dictionary and deduce that
it means “bald/shaved head”.
They drag a guy with a shaved head, and … tie
his head to the king’s knee!
He gets really upset.
Cries out in pain.
Nor is the king’s arthritis getting any
better.
They call the King’s doctor.
Ask him why his advice isn’t working.
And the doctor says, it is “Poduthazhai”..
It is a medicinal herb.
I wanted you to tightly pack it around his
knee!
It is from this story that the Tamil phrase
“Mottaitthalaikkum Mozhanghaalukkum Mudicchu
Pottaarppol” came!
That contextless connection came from this
story.
I wanted to just add that little bit because
we continue to do that comparison.
Apples and Oranges.
Let us learn to not do that.
We will meet soon enough!
Thank you!